--- Slide 1 ---
CSE 508
Network Security (Lecture 1- Motivation and Introduction)
Omar Haider Chowdhury
Empire Innovation Scholar and Associate Professor
Department of Computer Science
Stony Brook University

--- Slide 2 ---
Acknowledgment
Some of the slide contents you will see throughout this class are based on slides from the following individuals:
Michalis Polychronakis (Stony Brook University)
Zakir Durumeric (Standford University) 
Ninghui Li (Purdue University) 
Sze Yiu Chau (Chinese University of Hong Kong)
Cristina Nita-Rotaru (Northeastern University)
Doug Jacobson (Iowa State University)
Kevin Du (Syracuse University)


--- Slide 3 ---
Logistics

--- Slide 4 ---
Learn how networks and their protocols can be attacked.
 Learn how the network can be used as a stepping stone to attack computers/information software/systems 

Learn defensive techniques to prevent attacks and/or limit their consequences.
Examples: Authentication, Access control, Various crypto tools, Firewall, Intrusion Detection, and Prevention, etc.
Man-made complex systems, software, and network will have errors, and these errors may be exploited

Broad goals of this course

--- Slide 5 ---
Course
Hardware
OS
Software
Authentication
Network Security
Web Security

--- Slide 6 ---
This class will have the following modules:
Background: 
Cryptography
Introduction to Network and Protocols
Authentication
Access Control
Attacks and Defenses against protocols 
Essential tools for attack and defense
Web Security
Privacy and Anonymity 
Advanced Topics (Protocol Verification)
Modules

--- Slide 7 ---
This course does not have a required textbook

We may, however, choose to use some specific chapters of some books
We will make these chapters available 

PowerPoint/PDF lecture slides will be the main resource

We may also consult recent research papers and tutorials for details  

Textbook

--- Slide 8 ---
Instructor: Omar Chowdhury 
Email: omar@cs.stonybrook.edu

Office hours:   Monday (9:30 am - 11:00 am) 
			Tuesday (5:15 pm - 6:45 pm) or email to 				arrange other time
Location: NCS 363 (or, zoom with prior arrangements) 


Instructor

--- Slide 9 ---
Yet to be finalized 

TA office hours will be shared with you
TAs

--- Slide 10 ---
We will use Piazza for discussion  (See Syllabus for joining information if you have not already joined)

The course schedule will be finalized by Friday and will be shared with you

We will use Brightspace to submit assignments and maintain the grades 
Course Information
Keep an eye out of Piazza announcements

--- Slide 11 ---
URL: https://piazza.com/stonybrook/spring2026/cse508

Access Code: 4a67i3qqsakClass Link: https://piazza.com/stonybrook/spring2026/cse508/home


Please Sign-up in Piazza

--- Slide 12 ---
Homework assignments – both written and programming – 40% 
Midterm Exam 1 – 15%
Midterm Exam 2 – 15% 
Final Exam – 30% 
Course Composition

--- Slide 13 ---
 Exams will be comprehensive
 Assignments will have written, programming, or both portions 
 Grades will be based on individual merits
 +/- grading scheme will be used
Grading

--- Slide 14 ---
 Please do not use any external libraries unless explicitly suggested
 Please do not copy from the Internet or each other 
 Please do not expect to get credit for source code that does not compile 
 Please exercise caution when using generative AI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, Gemini, Github CoPilot)
Programming Assignments

--- Slide 15 ---
 Unless explicitly authorized, each student will be entitled to 5 late days
 1 late day will enable one to push the deadline by a day 
Late days do not apply to exams 
 No fractional late days  
Late Days

--- Slide 16 ---
All the turned in source and text must be yours  
Copying will result in a zero and will be reported
Discussions on homework/assignments is, however, highly encouraged
 
 Please do not use generative AI tools unless explicitly mentioned

Ask me if you are not sure whether something will be considered cheating
Academic Integrity

--- Slide 17 ---
Discussion board of Piazza
Email me (cc the TAs) 
Be patient and respectful 
Please use your Stony Brook email address 
Include [CSE:508] in your email’s subject line 
Come to office hours 
Discuss with your peers
Getting Help

--- Slide 18 ---
Motivation

--- Slide 19 ---
Impact of Security

- Anthem Data Breach in Jan 2015
Second-largest health insurer in the US
Data of up to 80 million individuals obtained by hackers

Anthem: "Cyber attackers executed a very sophisticated attack to gain unauthorized access to one of our parent company’s IT systems and have obtained personal information…  The information accessed may have included names, dates of birth, Social Security numbers, health care ID numbers, home addresses, email addresses, employment information, including income data. We have no reason to believe credit card or banking information was compromised.”
- How did the attack happen?
- Why should I be more scared if Anthem serves 5 million individuals instead of 80 million?


--- Slide 20 ---
Password breach
RockYou  32 million user passwords 
Yahoo 500 million user accounts 
Adobe 3 million user accounts 
Ashley Madison 37 million user accounts
Uber 57 million account data breach 
Target 41 million consumer data breach  
143 million user data breach from Equifax

--- Slide 21 ---
Stuxnet
Stuxnet: Windows-based Worm
Worm: self-propagating malicious software (malware)
Attack Siemens software that control industrial control systems (ICS) and these systems
Used in nuclear power plants, among other factories
First reported in June 2010, the public were only aware of it only in July 2010

A digital weapon created by nation states
Iran confirmed that nuclear program damaged by Stuxnet
Sophisticated design, special targets, expensive to develop

--- Slide 22 ---
Nation-state Attacks

--- Slide 23 ---
Examples ..

--- Slide 24 ---
Examples ..

--- Slide 25 ---
Examples ..
…

--- Slide 26 ---
Computer Security
Security = Sustain desirable properties under intelligent adversaries
Making the above precise requires defining the following two aspects precisely

Desirable properties
Understand what properties are needed.
Intelligent adversaries
Needs to understand/model adversaries
Always think about adversaries.


--- Slide 27 ---
Security Goals
Confidentiality (secrecy, privacy)
- only those who are authorized to know can know

Integrity (also authenticity in communication)
- only modified by authorized parties and in permitted ways
- do things that are expected 

Availability
- those authorized to access can get access

--- Slide 28 ---
Violations of CIA
Anthem Data Leakage
Confidentiality?
Integrity?

Email Phishing/Malware Attacks
Integrity?
Confidentiality?

The Stuxnet attack compromises
Integrity of software systems, 
Availability of some control functionalities,
Confidentiality of some keys to sign malware to be loaded by Windows

--- Slide 29 ---
Why attacks occur?
Who are the attackers?
bored teenagers, criminals, organized crime organizations, rogue (or other) states, industrial espionage, angry employees, …
Why they do it?
fun, 
fame, 
profit, …
computer systems are where the moneys are
Political/military objectives


--- Slide 30 ---
Why attacks succeed?
Software/computer/information   systems/designs are buggy
They are complex, dynamic, and increasingly so

Users make mistakes

Some Technological factors
Inherent power of computers Von Neumann architecture: stored programs mixing code and data
Unsafe program languages

--- Slide 31 ---
Reasons why these factors exist

Economical factors
Lack of incentives for secure software
Security is difficult, expensive and takes time

Human factors
Lack of security training for software engineers
Largely uneducated population
Security often gets in the way


--- Slide 32 ---
Security is secondary
What protection/security mechanisms one has in the physical world?

Why the need for security mechanisms arises?

Security is secondary to the interactions that make security necessary.


--- Slide 33 ---
Security is relative
Is your phone secure?

What does “secure” mean?

Security is relative:
to the kinds of loss one consider
Security objectives/properties need to be stated
to the threats/adversaries under consideration.
Security is always under certain assumptions

--- Slide 34 ---
Why are Networks Important?
Enable one to communicate with outside

The obvious stepping-stone to launch remote attacks on different systems and software

Cannot live with it (threats and vulnerabilities) and cannot live without it (utilities)  

--- Slide 35 ---
Internet (then, ARPANET) in 1969
© 2004 Computer History Museum - http://www.computerhistory.org/internet_history/

Original participants of ARPANET:
SRI (Stanford Research Institute)
UCSB (University of California at Santa Barbara)
UCLA (University of California at Los Angeles)
Utah (University of Utah)


--- Slide 36 ---
Internet in 1998
© Bill Cheswick – 
http://www.cheswick.com/ches/map/gallery/index.html


--- Slide 37 ---
Internet Now
© Submarine Cable Map – https://www.submarinecablemap.com/


--- Slide 38 ---
Internet Users as of 2024

--- Slide 39 ---
Mobile Data Subscriptions as of 2024

--- Slide 42 ---
How does ransomware often enter the victim’s system?
© https://informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/worlds-biggest-data-breaches-hacks/#bysensitivity


--- Slide 43 ---
© https://informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/worlds-biggest-data-breaches-hacks/#bysensitivity


How does malware exfiltrate data out of systems?

--- Slide 44 ---
Roadmap

--- Slide 45 ---
Types of Computer Security Research
Gained insights

--- Slide 46 ---
Reasoning about Attacker Capability
Reasoning about attacker capability is hard
We are taught to think and act positively

--- Slide 47 ---
Changing the Point-of-View
Often breaking into a system or software requires 
changing the point-of-view

--- Slide 48 ---
Roadmap

--- Slide 49 ---
Interesting aspects of Security
Interesting
Challenging
Problem-solving skills
Rewarding
Broad and deep knowledge of Computer Science
Huge attack surface
State-of-knowledge changes quickly

--- Slide 50 ---
Challenges of Security
Defense is almost always harder than attack.
In which ways information security is more difficult than physical security?
adversaries can come from anywhere
computers enable large-scale automation
adversaries can be difficult to identify
adversaries can be difficult to punish
potential payoff can be much higher
In which ways information security is easier than physical security?


--- Slide 51 ---
Why is Security interesting? 
The most interesting/challenging threats to security are posed by human adversaries
Security is harder than reliability
Information security is a self-sustaining field
Can work both from attack perspective and from defense perspective
Security is about benefit/cost tradeoff
Thought often the tradeoff analysis is not explicit
Security is not all technological
Humans are often the weakest link

--- Slide 52 ---
Known Attacker Capabilities
Opportunistic attacker
Nation-state level attacker

--- Slide 53 ---
Attacks come from Network

--- Slide 54 ---
Users are the weakest link

--- Slide 55 ---
Roadmap

--- Slide 56 ---
Research Interests
System
Security
Software
Security
Network
Security
Formal verification and Automated Reasoning
My research group develops software that 
analyzes or proves the security of 
other systems, software, or networks.

--- Slide 57 ---
Research Interests

--- Slide 58 ---
4G LTE/5G Security and Privacy
5.8 billion users
807 operators
170 countries
A Global Standard
Supply chain
management
Autonomous vehicles
Internet of things
Autonomous
healthcare
Ensuring cellular networks’ resiliency to attacks is of utmost importance for a nation’s security posture. 

--- Slide 59 ---
4G LTE/5G Security and Privacy
59
Attacks on cellular networks in the wild are more common than we think.

--- Slide 60 ---
4G LTE/5G Security and Privacy
IMSI Request
IMSI = International Mobile Subscriber Identity
IMSI
Signal Power  Digger

--- Slide 61 ---
Cellular Network Attacks
Security
Privacy
….
….

--- Slide 62 ---
Potency of Cellular Network Attacks

--- Slide 63 ---
Questions Our Research Answered

--- Slide 64 ---
Defensive Solution

--- Slide 65 ---
Learn to think about security when doing things
Think about:
Adversary model (capability of the adversary)
Desirable properties
Trust assumptions (what I am depending upon for the desirable property to hold against certain adversary)

Learn to understand and apply security principles when designing/building/analyzing systems
E.g., principles of least privilege, separation of duty

Goal of the course

--- Slide 66 ---
 We discuss vulnerabilities and attacks

 Most vulnerabilities we discuss may have been fixed
 
 Some attacks may still cause harm

 Do not  try these outside the context of this course
Ethical Use of Information